README.md, before:

# Onyx Trust Registry

[![CI](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Contracts](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/workflows/Contracts/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/actions/workflows/contracts.yml)
[![Security](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/workflows/Security/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/actions/workflows/security.yml)

Onyx is the Trust Registry and KYB (Know Your Business) service for the [Open Checkout Network (OCN)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/ocn-common). It provides centralized trust management, business verification, and compliance checking capabilities for the OCN ecosystem. Onyx maintains allowlists and denylists, performs business verification checks, and provides APIs for trust verification across all OCN services.

## OCN Ecosystem

This service is part of the Open Checkout Network (OCN) - a decentralized payment infrastructure. Learn more about the OCN ecosystem:

- [OCN Common](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/ocn-common) - Shared schemas and utilities
- [Orca](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/orca) - Core decision engine
- [Weave](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/weave) - Audit and treasury receipts
- [Okra](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/okra) - Credit services
- [Opal](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/opal) - Wallet and virtual cards

## Quickstart (≤ 60s)

Get up and running with Onyx Trust Registry in under a minute:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx.git
cd onyx

# Setup everything (venv, deps, pre-commit hooks)
make setup

# Run tests to verify everything works
make test

# Start the service
make run
```

**That's it!** 🎉

The service will be running at `http://localhost:8000`. Test the trust registry:

```bash
# List all trusted providers
curl http://localhost:8000/trust/providers

# Check if a provider is allowed
curl http://localhost:8000/trust/allowed/trusted_bank_001

# Health check
curl http://localhost:8000/health
```

### Additional Makefile Targets

```bash
make lint        # Run code quality checks
make fmt         # Format code with black/ruff
make clean       # Remove virtual environment and cache
make help        # Show all available targets
```

## Manual Setup (Alternative)

If you prefer manual setup over the Makefile:

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Install pre-commit hooks
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install

# Run tests
pytest -q

# Start the service
uvicorn onyx.api:app --reload
```

## API Endpoints

### Core Endpoints
- `GET /health` - Health check endpoint

### Trust Registry v0
- `GET /trust/providers` - List all trusted credential providers
- `GET /trust/allowed/{provider_id}` - Check if a provider is allowed

### MCP (Model Context Protocol)
- `POST /mcp/invoke` - MCP protocol endpoint for trust operations

## Trust Registry Configuration

The Trust Registry can be configured using a YAML file:

```bash
# Copy sample configuration
cp config/trust_registry.sample.yaml config/trust_registry.yaml

# Customize the provider allowlist
# Edit config/trust_registry.yaml to add your trusted providers
```

**Built-in Providers** (fallback when no config file):
- `trusted_bank_001`, `verified_credit_union_002`, `authorized_fintech_003`
- `certified_payment_processor_004`, `licensed_lender_005`

See [docs/trust_registry.md](docs/trust_registry.md) for detailed configuration guide.

## Development

This project uses:
- **FastAPI** for the web framework
- **pytest** for testing
- **ruff** and **black** for code formatting
- **mypy** for type checking

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

chore: open phase-2-explainability and scaffold docs
- Create phase-2-explainability branch for AI explainability work
- Add Phase 2 section to CHANGELOG.md with explainability features
- Add Phase 2 status block to README.md with development info
- Create comprehensive PR template for Phase 2 development
- Include checklists for tests, contracts, CE validation, and explainability features
- Ensure CI remains green with no behavior changes

Phase 2 Features:
- AI-powered trust decision explanations
- LLM integration for human-readable trust reasoning
- Explainability API endpoints for trust validation
- Decision audit trail with explanations
- Integration with Azure OpenAI for explanations
- Enhanced MCP verbs for explainability features

README.md, after:

# Onyx Trust Registry

[![CI](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Contracts](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/workflows/Contracts/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/actions/workflows/contracts.yml)
[![Security](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/workflows/Security/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/actions/workflows/security.yml)

**Onyx** is the **Trust Registry and KYB (Know Your Business) service** for the [Open Checkout Network (OCN)](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/ocn-common).

## Phase 2 — Explainability

🚧 **Currently in development** - Phase 2 focuses on AI-powered explainability and human-readable trust decision reasoning.

- **Status**: Active development on `phase-2-explainability` branch
- **Features**: LLM integration, explainability API endpoints, decision audit trails
- **Issue Tracker**: [Phase 2 Issues](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aphase-2)
- **Timeline**: Weeks 4-8 of OCN development roadmap

Onyx provides centralized trust management, business verification, and compliance checking capabilities for the OCN ecosystem. Onyx maintains allowlists and denylists, performs business verification checks, and provides APIs for trust verification across all OCN services.

## OCN Ecosystem

This service is part of the Open Checkout Network (OCN) - a decentralized payment infrastructure. Learn more about the OCN ecosystem:

- [OCN Common](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/ocn-common) - Shared schemas and utilities
- [Orca](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/orca) - Core decision engine
- [Weave](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/weave) - Audit and treasury receipts
- [Okra](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/okra) - Credit services
- [Opal](https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/opal) - Wallet and virtual cards

## Quickstart (≤ 60s)

Get up and running with Onyx Trust Registry in under a minute:

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ahsanazmi1/onyx.git
cd onyx

# Setup everything (venv, deps, pre-commit hooks)
make setup

# Run tests to verify everything works
make test

# Start the service
make run
```

**That's it!** 🎉

The service will be running at `http://localhost:8000`. Test the trust registry:

```bash
# List all trusted providers
curl http://localhost:8000/trust/providers

# Check if a provider is allowed
curl http://localhost:8000/trust/allowed/trusted_bank_001

# Health check
curl http://localhost:8000/health
```

### Additional Makefile Targets

```bash
make lint        # Run code quality checks
make fmt         # Format code with black/ruff
make clean       # Remove virtual environment and cache
make help        # Show all available targets
```

## Manual Setup (Alternative)

If you prefer manual setup over the Makefile:

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Install pre-commit hooks
pip install pre-commit
pre-commit install

# Run tests
pytest -q

# Start the service
uvicorn onyx.api:app --reload
```

## API Endpoints

### Core Endpoints
- `GET /health` - Health check endpoint

### Trust Registry v0
- `GET /trust/providers` - List all trusted credential providers
- `GET /trust/allowed/{provider_id}` - Check if a provider is allowed

### MCP (Model Context Protocol)
- `POST /mcp/invoke` - MCP protocol endpoint for trust operations

## Trust Registry Configuration

The Trust Registry can be configured using a YAML file:

```bash
# Copy sample configuration
cp config/trust_registry.sample.yaml config/trust_registry.yaml

# Customize the provider allowlist
# Edit config/trust_registry.yaml to add your trusted providers
```

**Built-in Providers** (fallback when no config file):
- `trusted_bank_001`, `verified_credit_union_002`, `authorized_fintech_003`
- `certified_payment_processor_004`, `licensed_lender_005`

See [docs/trust_registry.md](docs/trust_registry.md) for detailed configuration guide.

## Development

This project uses:
- **FastAPI** for the web framework
- **pytest** for testing
- **ruff** and **black** for code formatting
- **mypy** for type checking

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
